# qcb_algorithms_for_bioinformatics_2021
This repository contains the python scripts for the exam of Algorithms For Bioinformatics - July 2021
\
\
\
\
\
**DIRECTORY STRUCTURE**
\
\
The program is built in modules. Four scripts are present into this repository and
  the directory is organized as follows:
  
  ```
                                               ---- align.py 
                                               |
  qcb_algorithms_for_bioinformatics_2021 (dir)-|
                                               |                    |---- SW.py
                                               ---- Modules (dir) --|---- DataStructures.py
                                                                    |---- ScalabilityTest.py                                                                   
  ```

  <align.py> is the main script: here the <argparse> library is used to get the required inputs from the user.
             This script imports SW.py and ScalabilityTest.py as modules.
                       
  <SW.py> contains the actual implementation of the Smith-Waterman algorithm. The code is extensively commented.
  
  <DataStructures.py> contains a <Node> class and a <Graph> class. These are the required data structures that 
                      are imported and used by the <SW.py> script.
    
  <ScalabilityTest.py> is just an example of how the program can be expanded by adding additional classes.
\
\
\
\
\
**BASIC FUNCTIONALITY**  
\
\
The script uses the <argparse> module in order to offer a friendly interface for the user.
To run the program from terminal, move into the directory and run:
  
  ```
  ./align.py SmithWaterman <sequence1> <sequence2>
  ```
  
This basic command gives as output the Scoring Matrix and the best sequence alignments.

Since the program is built in separated modules, it can be further expanded in the future. The Smith-Waterman algorithm
is implemented inside a Class that is the imported by <align.py>. Other sequence alignment algorithms can be implemented
by building new Classes inside the <Modules> directory. As a simple example of this, a second Class called <OtherAlgorithm> 
was implemented and it can be run using the following command:
  
  ```
  ./align.py Other <sequence1> <sequence2>
  ```
\
\
\
\
**ADVANCED FUNCTIONALITY**
\
\
  **SCORE SELECTION**  
  \
  The score to be used for the alignments can be selected by the user through the optional parameter '-s'.
  This parameter takes 3 <int> values as input. The correct synthax for the program to work is:
    
    ./align.py SmithWaterman <sequence1> <sequence2> -s <match> <mismatch> <gap>
  
  Note that <match> <mismatch> <gap> are only separated by a space and no punctuation mark is needed.
  Example:
    
    ./align.py SmithWaterman <sequence1> <sequence2> -s 2 -2 -3
  
  
  **FILTERING**  
  \
  The program is built to save all the possible alignments in a dictionary. The optional parameter '-f' can be used
  to filter those alignments and print only the desired ones. 
  The '-f' parameter can take one <str> value as input. The available parameters at the moment are 'best' and 'all'.
    'best': returns the alignments that obtained the best scores.
     'all': returns all the alignments, clustered by score, from best to worst. In real-world applications, this parameter
            is not useful, but for the purposes of the exam this can show the ability of the program to correctly identify 
            the alignments.
  If the '-f' argument is not specified, 'best' is used.
  Example:
    
    ./align.py SmithWaterman <sequence1> <sequence2> -f all
  
  
  **SCORE MATRIX PRINTING**  
  \
  By default, the scoring matrix generated by the Smith-Waterman algorithm is printed.
  In order to avoid this and to return only the alignments, the flag '--no-matrix' can be used.
  Example:
  
    ./align.py SmithWaterman <sequence1> <sequence2> --no-matrix
  
  
  **VERBOSE**  
  \
  In order to get more informations about the alignments, use the flag '--verbose'.
  Example:
  
    ./align.py SmithWaterman <sequence1> <sequence2> --verbose
\
\
\
\
**FURTHER INFORMATIONS**  
\
  For further informations about the available parameters run the command:

    ./align.py -h
    
  To understand the main ideas behind the code implementation, look at the comments that are present on the <SW.py> script 
  that is placed inside the <Modules> directory.
